---
title: Seragam Design System for GovTech Edu
description: Laying the foundation of design system to support the future of education in Indonesia.
thumbnail: design-system-thumbnail.png
selected: true
role: Product Designer
url: https://guru.kemdikbud.go.id/
Team: ["Muhammad Rivki", "Alfons Azhari", "Adwin Dwitaufani", "Budi Tanrim"]
deliverables: ["Design system", "User flows", "Mockups", "Prototypes", "Documentation"]
company: GovTech Edu, Indonesia
tags: ["web", "mobile", "design-system"]
---

### Begin with Reflection and Observation

GovTech Edu is a division unit of the Telkom Indonesia company that focuses on technology development for the Ministry of Education, Culture, and Technology Research of Indonesia. With the spirit of development, this division unit tries to solve the problems in Indonesia’s education system.
I was hired in February 2020 with an initial project to build a design system from scratch for internal needs. Before starting all the work, reflection and observation on what the team already has is the main thing to be identified. I conducted in-depth interviews and observed how the team determined their current difficulties and conditions. I learned that:

1. UI Kit is Already Exists, but Not Completed
Many designers create components by themselves if they are not available in the UI kit, resulting in different types of components that have one function but are visually distinct.

2. There is No Source of Truth From The Design System
The UI kit is only limited to the design side. Many components are made many times and not constructed, resulting in redundancy and reduced efficiency in terms of workflow.

3. There is No Rationale on The Design System In Line with The Company Vision
Both components and interfaces are built based only on the designer’s needs and  only keep up with the design that already exists.
These problems need to be resolved to create a more effective and efficient process within the product team. Let's look at building a product from scratch. We know that it is vital to develop our product easily by constructing systems to evolve, iterate, and experiment quickly.
I was lucky when I joined; in general, the stakeholders in our company already understand the benefits of the design system. In addition, I am supported by sufficient resources consisting of 1 Design Manager, 1 Front-end Developer, and 1 Android Engineer.

#### Building the Design System Team Foundation

There are many things to do when we want to build a team, and one of them is building the foundation. We need foundations for the internal team, in order to have a reference for the work we wanted to do. The foundations are Stakeholder Mapping and Design System Offering. In addition, a form of accountability is also needed to account for our work achievement, for example a communication plan and a roadmap of our Design System. Thus, I conducted workshops with the output of creating the initial foundation.

1. Stakeholder Mapping
It used to find out who are the direct and indirect stakeholders of the Design System. We can determine who has influence and who will benefit more from the Design System from this activity. This activity gives us an idea of who we are trying to satisfy in building a Design System.

2. Design System Offering
A Design System has many constituent components in it. By defining what we will provide, the team will avoid the consequences of doing anything.

3. Design System Communication Plan
Communication is an important part of creating a good Design System. By having a plan in terms of communication, we can provide a sense of awareness and promote that the team already has a set of rules and component libraries that can be used by the product team.
Roadmap of Design System
With the roadmap from the Design System, we have a clear understanding of the roadmap we are going to, where the team is, and the stretch goals that we will do in the future.

#### Design Principle
Moreover, there is another thing to be considered in developing a Design System, a Design Principle. A Design Principle will help us to make more predictable decisions to avoid decision-making based on gut feelings. In addition, the Design Principle is a reference for measuring and reflecting the quality of our work in the development of the Design System.

---

### Building The UI Kit
As we know, that UI kit already exists, and designers have started to adopt it gradually. The next challenge is, “How might we improve the current UI kit but keep the team using the kit?”. From several discussions and taking into account several factors, we decided that:

1. Design System Designer will redesign from scratch the UI kit that we built that reflects the principles of the company and the vision of the Design System;

2. When the design system designer redesigns from scratch, the Design System Engineer will inventory the pre-existing components and include them in the library. It aims to make the workflow effective in the product team and gradually increase the Design System adoption.

#### The Actual Making of The UI Kit

Before making the actual UI kit, I got help from Adwin, a Design Manager, to get the designer's list of components needed by the picking parts activity. After getting what Components are required, we prioritize 
component development by Design System Designers and Engineers.

After knowing what components are needed, we conduct a Design Audit of components in existing products. Design Audit aims to:
Knowing the inconsistency between each component that is in the product that is already in production;
Identifying usability and accessibility problems.

By conducting a Design Audit, we have data on which components are often used, which can help consider the Components that need to be focused on.

---

#### Design Token

The smallest element of the UI kit of the Design System is the Design Token. With the Design Token, Design Decisions are packaged in data and can be used as a source of truth from design and engineering. The Design Token contains colors, typography, border-radius, icons, font sizes, and animation specifications.

Initially, there was no Design Token in GovTech Edu at all. This causes Design Decisions in component or page design to be inserted in each feature or project and has many of the same values or variables defined repeatedly.

##### Building Spectrum Color

Spectrum Color is a set of colors used to design. We use Spectrum Color as a color reference, which is useful as a source of truth from Design Token. In practice, we build a color palette based on three principles:

1. Reflect Brand, namely GovTech Edu Principle (Company and Design System Principle),
2. Universal, because the audience is varied,
3. Usable and suitable in hardware.

In the Color Picking process, I also documented how this process can produce color with two things that must be present, which are:

1. Repeatable Process and Consider How It Scales
Design System Designer can be replaced if there is a change in team members at any time. Therefore, everyone can produce colors according to their needs.
We believe that if we don't have a process to make the color, we don't value the design system.

2. Consistent Naming and Usage
To produce colors by considering how a color can be developed and used in the wild.

##### Design Token Revisited and Improved

Not only are colors defined, but there are also tokens for typography. I got help from Budi as Lead Designer, then the Color Token and typography were reviewed  to be fixed and improved directly.

---

### Creating Components

The design audits have provided us with a list of the current components, and we need to redesign them. Apart from that, I also do a lot of research on other Design Systems to collect data about other components we may need in our products.

Even though creating components is a grunt/technical job, there is a workflow I do on every visible component, such as:

- Collaborate with the Engineer from the beginning when building a component to know the development limits.
- Analysis of a component usage in an existing product. By analyzing, we know where a component is used, what needs to be improved, and the emerging cases.
- Analysis of components in existing applications or Design Systems.
- Explore as much as possible and reflect on the Design Principle.
- If you have explored and determined the best exploration, create a component in Figma and specify the component's state and the component's name descriptively.
- Prepare a handoff and meet with the Engineer for component development.
- Publish the component and communicate to the team that the component is ready for use.

### Component Handoff

Handoff is an activity that is carried out when the Design Component is ready to be developed by the Engineer. In the Design System Team, a collaboration between roles is the main thing. The handoff process always involves the Engineer before, during, and after designing components. We usually carry out Handoff activities as follows:

1. Designer Handoff Component, which contains specifications, state, and variants of components in the form of documents. All designed components are attempted using the variant features provided by Figma.

2. The engineer sees the document. Then, the engineer will design the API of the component by holding a separate meeting with other Engineers.

#### The Problem

Before this case study was written, Figma did not yet have a feature to inspect component variants in which the Engineer would not know what properties exist quickly. The Design System Engineer told me that this was a pain and inefficient. I'm trying to solve this problem by creating a Figma Plugin to extract properties from a component variant and make the Engineer know the contents of the properties quickly.

### Adding Documentation for Developers

Having a single source of truth in Figma as a form of documentation is great for designers, but it is not very accessible to developers for various reasons. Our Design System Engineer for the web, Rivki, helped us create component documentation using Storybook. As Design System Engineer for Android, Alfons also helps us create previews of components integrated directly into the app build. This makes it easy for every engineer to find and use components; it can be by navigating specs in Figma or reading code in React or Kotlin.

---

### Outcomes

One of the most promising results is that Designers and Engineers at GovTech Edu have utilized the Design System to create new components and utilize existing components to suit their needs. This is a positive thing because it has increased productivity in terms of product development.

1. Centralized Design System for Designers and Engineers
A centralized Design System and having a dedicated team (the Core Design System) creates a greater sense of ownership for the entire team, and the product team is more focused on what they do first. This may be far from ideal because the team will rely on the Core Design System in making decisions.

2. Save Time and Cost with Fewer Problems Regarding Component Development and Design.
3. Almost All Teams Working On Web and Android Platforms Have Adopted The UI Library We Provide.

### The Next Steps

Maintaining, developing, and developing the Design System is a never-ending job. Documentation of components is one thing that needs to be fixed. Currently, the documentation is in the Figma file, which only contains the specifications of the components, while the usage rules are still incomplete. From an accessibility point of view, using Figma files may be comfortable for designers. At the same time, cross-roles such as Product Managers and Engineers will find it difficult to access and read them.

In addition, regarding contributions to components and Design Systems in general by Designers and Engineers who are in the squad/team, it is necessary to think about how the workflow will be because the key to the success of the Design System is the contribution itself.

Continuing to drive adoption across teams and meeting the different needs of the product design team is an equally important next step.

---

### Key Takeaways

Suppose you got this far. Thanks for sticking around! This is my first experience building a Design System from scratch with a structured process that involves many teams at once—lots of valuable lessons for my personal development and perhaps for the designers out there.

1. Don’t Overpromise and Underdeliver
I learned that Design System is a lot of work and never ends. The desire to satisfy the team by giving hope that what other Design Systems have created and want to implement can put more burden on us. If there is an underdeliver, then the team's trust will fade. More realistic about resources and capabilities.

2. Collaboration is The Easiest Way To Promote System Design
Always collaborate with anyone outside the internal Design System team. For example, always involve Engineers and Designers in the squad regarding component discussions. Do a joint review to find out what components we build. Not only to raise awareness of the Design System but also to help promote the adoption of the Design System.

3. New Schedules, Resource Issues, and Re-Prioritizations Which Mean Project Scope is Constantly Changing. I have to adapt to the changes and still deliver the best designs on time with tight deadlines.
